[DRAFT] Project status markers in the simple index (#2)
trail-of-forks/peps: peps/pep-9999.rst

   each project's user-facing (i.e. non-index) HTML.

In summary: there are multiple ways to communicate the "status" of a project in
Python packaging, but none of these mechanisms are *simultaneously* (1)
machine-readable, (2) general, (3) index-agnostic, and (4) updatable without
pushing a new distribution:

.. csv-table::
    :header: "Mechanism", "Machine-readable?", "General?", "Index-agnostic?", "Updatable?"

    "Trove classifiers", "✅", "✅", "✅", "❌"
    "Yanking", "✅", "❌", "✅", "✅"
    "Project statuses", "✅", "✅", "❌", "✅"

This PEP proposes adopting PyPI's project statuses as an index-agnostic
mechanism, satisfying all four conditions.

Specification
=============

This PEP specifies two aspects: a set of project status markers,
as well as their presentation in the standard HTML and JSON indices.

Project status markers
----------------------

This PEP proposes the following project status markers.

A project **MAY** have multiple status markers. When evaluating multiple status
markers for index behavior, the index **MUST** use the strongest negative
requirement. For example, if a project is both archived and quarantined, the

> index **MUST NOT** offer any distributions of the project for download.

Author: Flagging: I included this as a MAY, even though at the moment PyPI only supports a single status marker. I could go either way on it: having multiple markers (at least at the representation level) _could_ be useful, but it also significantly complicates the PEP (e.g. with this monotonic prescription).

Another reason to allow multiple statuses is because indices might want to include their own (e.g. `x-pypi-blahblah`), although I'm not aware of any actual demand for this.

Curious what others think.

Reviewer: I think this makes things a lot more complicated (it means that the requirements for various status markers must be combinable, or that some markers are mutually exclusive, etc.) I think it makes more sense to only permit a single status.

Index semantics:

* The index hosting the project **MUST NOT** allow uploads of new distributions to
  the project.
* The index **MUST** offer existing distributions of the project for download.

Installer semantics:

* Installers **MAY** produce warnings about a project's archival.

``quarantined``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Description: The project is considered generally unsafe for use, e.g. due to
malware.

Index semantics:

* The index hosting the project **MUST NOT** allow uploads of new distributions to
  the project.
* The index **MUST NOT** offer any distributions of the project for download.

Installer semantics:

* Installers **MAY** produce warnings about a project's quarantine, although
  doing so is effectively moot (as the index will not offer any distributions
  for installation).

``deprecated``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Description: The project is considered obsolete, and may have been superseded
by another project.

Index semantics:

* The index hosting the project **MUST** allow uploads of new distributions to
  the project.
* The index **MUST** offer existing distributions of the project for download.

Installer semantics:

> * Installers **MAY** produce warnings about a project's deprecation.

Author: NB: I added this one to round the PEP out, but PyPI doesn't support it yet. Curious what others think about whether it makes sense to specify it, or defer it for a future living standards change.

Status markers in the index APIs
--------------------------------

This PEP defines version 1.4 of the index APIs.

HTML index
~~~~~~~~~~

The following changes are made to the
:ref:`simple repository API <packaging:simple-repository-api-base>`:

* The index **SHALL** define the ```pypi:repository-version`` as ``1.4``.
* When a project has one or more statuses, the index **SHALL** add
  an appropriate ``pypi:project-status`` meta tag for each.

For example, the following would be a valid HTML index response for
``sampleproject`` after is has been marked as both ``archived`` and
``quarantined``:

.. code-block:: html

    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html>
      <head>
        <meta name="pypi:repository-version" content="1.4">
        <meta name="pypi:project-status" content="archived">

>         <meta name="pypi:project-status" content="quarantined">

Author: Flagging: another option here would be to invent some syntax, e.g.:

```html
<meta name="pypi:project-status" content="archived,quarantined">
```

However, multiple `<meta>` tags with the same name are valid HTML, so I figured having a slightly more verbose representation was simpler to consume. But I'm open to alternatives.

PEP: 9999
Title: Project status markers in the simple index
Author: William Woodruff <william@yossarian.net>
Sponsor: TODO
PEP-Delegate: TODO
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/79356
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 08-Apr-2025
Post-History: `03-Feb-2025 <https://discuss.python.org/t/79356/>`__

Abstract
========

This PEP proposes a standardized set of project status markers, as well
as a mechanism for communicating those markers in the HTML and JSON
simple indices.

Rationale and Motivation
========================

The "status" of a project is an important piece of metadata, made more important
by growth in both the breadth and depth of the Python packaging ecosystem.

> Both humans and tools use the a project's status (or proxies for its status,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both humans and tools use the project's status (or proxies for its status,
```

> Both humans and tools use the a project's status (or proxies for its status,
> such as recent activity) to determine whether the project is maintained or

Author: ```suggestion
Both humans and tools use project statuses (or proxies for status,
such as recent activity) to determine whether the project is maintained or
```

> otherwise suitable for inclusion as a software component.

Reviewer 2: maybe:
```suggestion
otherwise suitable for inclusion as a software dependency (or standalone use).
```

> otherwise suitable for inclusion as a software component.

Author: ```suggestion
otherwise suitable for consumption.
```

Python packaging has at least three different mechanisms for communicating
the "status" of a project:

1. Distributions can include *trove classifiers* in their metadata, as
   originally specified in :pep:`301`. The list of supported classifiers is
   `maintained by the PyPA <https://github.com/pypa/trove-classifiers>`_,
   and includes the ``Development Status`` hierarchy. For example, a
   distribution can include the ``Development Status :: 7 - Inactive``

>    to indicate that the distribution's project is inactive.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   distribution can include the ``Development Status :: 7 - Inactive``
   classifier to indicate that the distribution's project is inactive.
```

   Trove classifiers are flexible, but also come with significant limitations:
   they're machine-readable and are rendered on indices like PyPI, but
   they also require the maintainer to push one or more *new* distributions
   each time they wish to update their project's development status.
   Furthermore, because distributions are *de facto* immutable in the Python

>    packaging ecosystems, older distributions can't have their classifiers

Reviewer 2: (not sure about this one, ignore if there are other ecosystems (Conda?) where this applies)
```suggestion
   packaging ecosystem, older distributions can't have their classifiers
```

Author: Typo, thanks!

   updated to reflect the current status of the project.

2. Indices can mark distributions and releases as "yanked", as originally
   specified in :pep:`592`. Yanked distributions are not considered
   eligible for dependency resolution.

   When a distribution has been yanked, it is marked with ``data-yanked``
   in the HTML index and with ``yanked: bool | str`` in the JSON index.
   Additionally, indices like PyPI will hide yanked distributions by default
   and will render them with a notice when the user navigates directly to them.

   Yanking is machine-readable like trove classifiers, but is single-purpose

>    rather than general-purpose: users can specify a free-form "yank reason,"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   rather than general-purpose: users can specify a free-form "yank reason",
```

Author: American English uses commas inside quotes! 

Ref: https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/general_writing/punctuation/quotation_marks/more_quotation_mark_rules.html

   but the semantics of yanking are fixed.

3. PyPI itself has *project statuses*, which apply to the entire project
   (i.e., all releases and distributions). Project statuses have both
   maintainer- and index-admin-controllable states:

   * PyPI administrators can "quarantine" a project. Quarantine behaves like
     a strengthened yank: the project remains entirely uninstallable while
     quarantined.

   * Project maintainers can "archive" a project. Archiving a project
     disables new release and distribution uploads to that project,
     but otherwise has no effect on the project's downloadability.

   Project statuses are machine-readable *in principle*, but are not currently
   exposed via any of PyPI's APIs. Instead, PyPI renders project statuses on
   each project's user-facing (i.e. non-index) HTML.

In summary: there are multiple ways to communicate the "status" of a project in
Python packaging, but none of these mechanisms are *simultaneously* (1)

> machine-readable, (2) general, (3) index-agnostic, and (4) updatable without

Reviewer 2: would it be worth it to add a "(5) project-level", for the fact that Trove classifiers and Yanking operate at the distribution level (distributions in the same project can have different statuses), whereas Project statuses operate at the project level (a status applies to the entire project)?

Author: True, good call. I'll add that!

Author: Hmm, I think this overlaps pretty closely with (4), so I'll reword that one.

* The index **SHALL** define the ``pypi:repository-version`` as ``1.4``.
* When a project has one or more statuses, the index **SHALL** add
  an appropriate ``pypi:project-status`` meta tag for each.

For example, the following would be a valid HTML index response for
``sampleproject`` after is has been marked as both ``archived`` and
``quarantined``:

.. code-block:: html
    :emphasize-lines: 5-6

    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html>
      <head>
        <meta name="pypi:repository-version" content="1.4">
        <meta name="pypi:project-status" content="archived">
        <meta name="pypi:project-status" content="quarantined">
        <title>Links for sampleproject</title>
      </head>
      <body>
        <h1>Links for sampleproject</h1>
      </body>
    </html>

Observe that, per the ``quarantined`` semantics above, the index response
contains no distribution links for the project.

JSON index
~~~~~~~~~~

The following changes are made to the
:ref:`JSON simple index <packaging:simple-repository-api-json>`:

* The index **SHALL** define the ``meta.api-version`` as ``1.4``.
* When a project has one or more statuses, the index **SHALL** add each status

>   to the ``project-status`` key to the JSON response. When no statuses

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  to the ``project-status`` key in the JSON response. When no statuses
```
